D: This is Diego Sesmas and for my senior project I’ll be interviewing Daniel
Padilla
P: Hello hello
1. D: My first question is when did you start working in software development, or
the industry as a whole?
P: Okay I started working on when I was on my fourth semester year during my
university years. So my career was five year long; it was divided in ten semesters.
My first job was on the fourth semester. I started working in the university itself. I
was the system administrator of all the mainframe equipment in the university.
So that’s when I start working. I mean these mainframes was for the university
labs and for all the students so that was my first job. So I started in the year 1993.
2. D: That’s very interesting! So my next question is what was the path that you
took for your—I think a better way to put this would be what—how did you
choose this career?
P: Okay so interesting question the reason I chose this career is I always been
good in math and science so I knew that I was going to be an engineer. I mean I
didn’t like medicine, I hate blood so I started by elimination I knew I didn’t
wanna be a doctor. I also I like to read a lot of technical articles but I’m not really
good any reading books in general so I knew that that rules out all that has to go
with lawyers and you know philosophy anything the has to do with reading a lot
that’s not my thing, so I knew that I can be that. So that only lead to really
accounting and administration or engineering and therefore I really like—I was
really good in math so I think the was an obvious choice, you know, I knew I was
gonna be an engineer. And then I was interested in a electronics also I was
interested in civil engineering and then of course computer science, so I ended up
deciding on computer science because at that time, I mean I’m talking here late
eighties early nineties, you all the video game industry was just in it’s infancy,
and it really really caught my attention you know the graphics back then it was
like something—I mean nowadays you will laugh about them but back then then
it was—you know everything was terminal, text based so seing graphics in a
computer was something really really amazing. So really because a video games I
decided you know what? I’m just going to study computer science and that’s it! I
decided to study about it because I love video games in the the late eighties. And
yea I don’t regret it. I love it. I love what I study, I love my career, I would
definitely choose that again.
D: That is reassuring to hear.
P: Yep
3. D: So, on the other hand, my next question is looking back on a how you got to
where you are now, is there anything you would change
P: Okay now regarding to—sorry I forgot to mention that by now when I started
out I studied computer science, then first—I mean by the way I got in because I
love games. I’ve never ever worked in game development or anything, it was just
starting point. But then you know at first I started working as system
administrator. I mean basically in the university my first job was I was a system
administrator. Then when I finish my university my first job was in a beer
company but I was again in system administration. I was working in IT and I was
the system administrator of a lot of mainframe equipments they had all the
factories. So it was a still in system administration, I loved it, but then came an
opportunity to change and I came to the US—I mean all these happening in
Mexico, where I’m from—and then there was an opportunity to go to the US so I
moved to a company, but now more in the in the customer support area, and
these first company that I moved in was—they were the makers of a traffic
system. This is for the television industry, so in a multi-channel operation—you
know like cable companies or direct-to-home broadcasting companies, you have a
lineup of hundreds of channels, so you need a system that has all the input for all
the, you know what is gonna be the program you for all those hundreds of
channels, so this company did the software that provides that technology I mean
to to be able to scale to hundreds of channels in the broadcasting industry. So I
started working for them but in a customer support capacity because I was
speaking Spanish all the customers wear in the Latin American region. From
there I always stayed in the television industry. I mean then I moved to their
condition access side, I passed through also the subscriber management, SETO
box development, I mean it’s always been related to the broadcasts industry. Sort
of all my path to what I do now.
4. D: Along that path, what would you—is there any regrets? Anything you’d do
differently? Or just anything to look out for?
P: Anything to look out for… I mean I always loved that, you know even though
I’ve been in the same industry I think I have covered pretty much everything in
this industry so I have a very broad view of the industry, I mean from the systems
point of view, because I have I been working across all this time in all these
systems probably if I had stayed in just one system them maybe after so many
years definitely I will look for something else otherwise it gets too repetitive, but
because I have been jumping and really covering all the systems involved like I
said I mean from from Q&A, to SETO boxes, to subscriber management systems,
to entitlement management, to conditional access, scheduling delivery, so
everything, encryption, encoding, decoding, so yeah I mean it’s been it’s been
great. I think the only thing that I would different is if I stay too long in this doing
the same thing I would definitely jump earlier you know before becomes too
boring or repetitive. That’s the only thing that I would do.
5. D: As you have been in the industry, how have you seen it change? Since you
started to now, really.
P: Ah, it has changed a lot. I mean pretty much all my career has been in the
broadcasting world so when I enter the, you know, when I joined this company
’98, it was really the beginnings of the digital television world because before all
broadcasting world was analog you know when everybody could just cut the
cable, put a multiplexer and getting to signals from the same cable and only one
paying and stuff like that was in the analog world, but once it switched to digital
that was no longer possible because now everything is encrypted digitally and
only if you have the authorization then you can decode. So these started really
the nineties the digital broadcasting and I joined the when directv pretty much
had just a couple of years of launching. Those were the first digital systems, like
directv. I mean I joind at the very very very beginning, so I’ve seen in evolve I
saw from rapid, huge growth of the industry to where we are now which is pretty
much plateauing and competing with a new technologies like a streaming and
you know all that, but but yeah I mean I’ve seen a lot of changes in the industry
and consolidation and it’s been interesting.
6. D: Right, next question. In the same theme, how do you think your spot in the
industry and the field you’re in will change in the future?
P: In the future definitely everything is pointing to streaming, okay? So the
difference between the traditional broadcasting and streaming is you know in the
broadcasting world you have channels you have a schedules. Nowadays not
everybody has the patience to sit on tv to see what he’s in there I mean right now
is more like you just go and watch what you want to see so that model works very
well for content that is no live meaning if you want to see a movie, if you want to
see a program, you just go to netflix go to any any other streaming platforms and
you can watch it, but when it comes to live tv, especially sports events, a lot of
those sports events still have you know the big broadcasters they still have the
monopoly in the sense of exclusivity contracts, so I feel that as long as that exists
—and they have a lot of power because you know a lot of these companies they
are the, you know when you have cable you know not necessarily mean tv but
you might still have the internet so even if is streaming the cable company has a
lot to say in that, so they control a lot of these contracts with the sports industry
and so on. I mean I think that everything is going to be drive by the sports
industry at this point. And also by be content because whoever owns the content
that at the end it doesn’t matter how you distribute it, broadcasting, streaming, at
the end the one that makes the money is the content owner okay? So on that’s
why there is also consolidation in buying the more content. I will say that’s also
why netflix changed you know to to be a producer of content in not only paying
for content, they actually own the content so they can stay relevant. Otherwise
would just increase the the price of the continent they would be ruled out. But it
is still an industry in a lot of evolution. I mean nothing he set in stone. And the
other thing is that the world is pretty big and not everywhere you have
broadband introduction. Only the big cities have broadband, but in the world—
especially the third world countries—there is a still a lot of rural areas where the
only way to deliver something with satellite. That’s why these broadcasters are
not going to dissapear, it’s just that they’re going to have a diminished role. But
they’re gonna be here for a while.
7. D: Okay, so going back to you, in your opinion, what you say is your favorite
part of your career? What you like the most about it?
P: I mean the in the computer science days a lot of fields. I like the system
administration part. I like the data analysis. Data analyses I mean the preparing
the analyses, databases I’d say is interesting. I’ve been most of my career
dedicated a customer support and customer support is also very important
because that’s the interface between the company and what the customer needs
and so the future development goes towards the customer needs so customer
support is very interesting. And I mean nowadays artificial intelligence is
becoming the next big thing I am not familiar with that technology. I haven’t
really needed to work with that yet. I don’t know how it’s going to affect the
industry. But yeah I mean I would say that data analyses, system administration,
networking, it’s very interesting. And yeah I don’t have a lot of experience in
other fields like security. In all that stuff it’s not my expertise.
8. D: Building off the that, like in your area of expertise in just like your day-to-
day role in your job, what aspect of that do you—what sets this job apart from a
other choice? What about this job do you like the most? I’m not sure I put it the
best but—
P: I like the interaction with a customer. I always I mean not always but I’ve been
a big part of my career customer support I support the customers. All across these
years I have a good relationship with them so it’s really nice to be—I mean in this
industry you kind of, it’s like marrying a company. I mean they’re not many
broadcasters in each country. I mean have really some countries you have only
like two or three at most a handful of broadcasters. It’s a very cost intensive
industry therefore there’s not many players but the the ones that exist are very
big. I mean each customer each of our customers have millions of customers so
they’re very big companies and you know the company I’m working at provides
conditional accessibility keeping encryption so once you have encryption in a
device, you’re kind of marrying that company, meaning is not so easy to replace
millions of boxes with a different technology so that’s why we develop very deep
relationships with our customers therefore we know them for years. I mean it’s
not that you know some companies have hundreds of thousands of customers but
the customer has no relationship with with a company. Ours is opposite we have
a very deep—we’re almost partners with the customer. Sort of relationship that
can with that is there really really interesting really pretty nice and very nice to
work with a company a as partner. We understand their needs, we want them to
thrive because by them doing good we do good so like a partnership really so
that’s what I like the most. The human part.
9. D: So, what aspects of your job do you dislike, if any? Or is like the perfect
career that anyone could want?
P: No no definitely there are some stuff that I mean I guess these is more of
companies I don’t like politics but unfortunately politics in companies are always
the so yeah I mean I guess that’s the part that I don’t like. It that happens in every
company. Politics inside the company. I’ve always seen my job know from the
technical point of view so to me really I mean that’s the beauty of computer
science everything is binary it works or it doesn’t work and I mean there’s no in
between you know. Versus the politics you know once you involve the sales team
hardware, and I want to ask about the software because I remember you
mentioning you find one of the most important things to be a always learning
new things. Like, you’ve mentioned your projects, so where do you go to do this
learning?
P: Okay, for learning you know computer science, technology advances too fast,
So you always need to be updated. I mean a I finished my university in ninety five
long time ago that doesn’t mean that I’ve study or learn anything from then I’ve
been learning all these time not formally with schools or but I just learn
everything on the internet and that is a beauty of the internet all the
information’s there. I’m really good at self learning that helps becuase you need
to be diciplined and organized and if you want to learn somethingyou will learn
it. Just by the resources that are in the internet. Of course some people prefer
more the traditional way of coding and enrolling to a class going to the class
records or something and you know I mean in this industry there is a lot of
where they call certifications but you know the certifications everything that is
taught in a certification you could learn on your own. Like I said, it depends a lot
on personality. I would definitely recommend you always keep updated in
everything that that you need to learn. Now there are way more things to learn
that time available, so I would say focus your attention on the stuff that you really
want to learn. There’s some that you’re going to actually use instead of trying to
learn everything. I mean around the beginning I was trying to learn everything I
would read and I knew of a little bit about everything but at the same time you
start realizing that is better to specialize and instead of learning a little bit about
everything I mean it’s ok to know a little bit about everything but actually
specialize in the stuff you are actually using and really go deep in those you know
because like I say time is not infinite I would love if the they had fifty hours but
unfortunately there is limited time yeah I mean focus your energy on on learning
this stuff they that you working on. You know and also the stuff that that is more
promising in the future because there’s a lot of technologies that in the beginning
seem like that was the they I mean seem like that was the big thing and few years
later they just vanished and something has happened. Like programming
languages you can see it all the time there new languages but you know some
languages stay alive four more years the others it’s more like they disappear
eventually. But yeah definitely recommend keeping always updated and learning
on your own. It’s always good.
13. D: Something else, you mentioned how you like a job and it’s great but the
thing that you dislike the most is a lot of the—really interesting thing I just
thought about—something you enjoy a lot is the people like the customer support
whereas the thing you dislike the most in a way is also the people but more like
your company, so—wait, sorry—with the company, how do you feel about the
work environment?
P: The work environment… I’ve never really had issues or anything or dislike
anything with a work environment. I mean we always had a very good am work
environment. Part of that I think is because in computer science there is a lot of
stuff that is open source or public domain, so finding another employee your
another coworker that does the same is very easy I mean like for example let’s
say that you were with in networking and you need a networking guy I mean all
the the operating system for Cisco not be secret I mean it’s open source it’s
everywhere so anyone can know that stuff and it’s very easy to replace a person
in this industry. Because you know the company I work for does encryption and
by the nature of the industry it’s not open source is actually a very well-kept
secret. And also in the broadcasting industry is not very easy to know I mean to
see people that knows about this industry you know all the protocols in this
industry. So it’s not very easy to replace a engineers. So maybe by these
combination we’ve have people that lasted for years and years and years. Not
only I mean we notice that not only in my company but also with a customer. The
customer faces the same itssue it’s not very easy for them to replace engineers so
you work along people for many many many many years with was no rotation,
and therefore we don’t see that much of—I mean we don’t see these issues with
people like us. Were more like family and I don’t know if these is is normal but all
the relations we have with our customers are like partners. We know them for
many years and it’s always the same people and they stay for very long time there
in their roles and in their careers so there’s not a lot of rotation on this industry
and and you find the same people even if some people leaves the company you
find him later in another company it’s amazing but like like I said it’s not because
—in a lot of the open source or development or stuff like that where it’s common
knowledge probably rotation is huge but in these industries, no you work more
or less with the same people and the human factor is always—I will say it’s
always good. I mean you know the same people all over always. We have a good
relationships.
14. D: That actually covers something I wanted to ask as well, job security. So, if
you’ve thought about it, what is your approach to making sure you stay in job?
P: Job security… like I said it is not easy to replace engineers that work with
proprietary technology it’s not like you know you hire somebody we’ll need to
train them and the cost of training—it takes a long time I mean and many times
not even train and—I noticed this, I have trained a lot of people and I’ve noticed
that doesn’t matter how long you train them or how well you tried to instruct
something, only experience is what makes you really understand or learn the
systems and—so he takes time I mean for an engineer, especially a support
engineer in these fields from hiring to really let him be on his own supporting
everything you maybe a couple of years I mean is not—the system is very very
broad I mean it’s huge well the inputs and outputs and all the systems in
between, it’s just very very big and it takes a long time to to dominate where the
problem is. So most of the engineers that—like I said they stayed in the industry
for a long time. And that at the same time gives you a lot of job security because
like I same is not easy to replace people I mean the same company and they don’t
wanna let you go because it’s not easy to replace you so. And now on top of that I
mean it helps in my case what has also I guess help me is being bilingual or
trilingual you know the fact I speak spanish portuguese that gives me I guess an
edge supporting all the latin american customers because my customers are
mostly in latin america so when I mean it’s not only replacing the—basically
everything in my experience everything that I know across this time but also you
know would need to find somebody that on top of that speaks spanish portugese
so not easy so it gives a lot of job security and of course by all those because I do
the job well and of course if tje results are not there it’s obvious that they will
replace you so I guess they have advises always prepare always be the best you
can be in whatever you’re doing and I mean that does definitely gonna give you
job security I mean if you’re very good at something nobody’s going to replace
you.
15. D: Thank you for that. As a final things since that’s most of the points I wanted
to cover, any general advice for someone entering this field?
P: Um, general advice would of course study a lot. There’s a lot to study. Computer
sciences is something that requires a lot of hands on I mean you’re gonna see a
lot of theory of course and a lot stuff in the school but there is nothing like hands
on meaning if you learn a language the only way to really learn languages is
coding I mean you need to code in that language so put yourself project I mean
even of course the schools going to you a lot of project but even personal projects.
Decide okay I’m gonna do these that you know nice big final projects and then do
them and that’s the was way to learn something, when you really get hands on
and you know because only then do realize it maybe whatever you studied in
school is not enough you need something else and that pushes you to always keep
looking and learning stuff to complete the project so yeah I mean always keep
learning always keep practicing yeah I mean that I think there will be the best
advice. But like I say always reasonable times. It is very easy when you’re young
staying twenty four hours in front of the computer but that’s not healthy. So
everything with limits but but yeah definitely always keep learning always keep
practicing always put yourself projects do stuff and keep learning. That’ll be my
best advice.
16. D: Actually, one more question. A light-hearted, personal struggle that I tend to
have and I wanted to see if I can get any input from you… how do you name your
projects? Because I’ll have a amazing project idea and I want to start working on
this, but what do I name it?
P: Okay for example let me see if I can give you—I wanna tell you what was my
one on my first projects… I mean one of my first projects is I didn’t wanna put all
my pictures on facebook or google or anything like that, but I didn’t really like
anything that was out their to do you know for like I mean I want to see my—I
mean to have a place where I can organize all my pictures so what do I do with
them? You know obviously as pictures start moving digitally before anybody
would take one two three pitchers because everything has to be film but once it
was digital you have hundreds and hundreds and hundreds so it’s not easy to just
have a little organizing directories its not really good so one of my projects his
okay let me do something so I can organize my pictures. And that force me to
learn about WordPress and HTML and Apache Servers so a lot of the stuff that
nobody has taught me in school and in my work and never really used it but I
was curious to learn I mean I hear about all these WordPress and these templates
I like okay lit I’m gonna build a website for my personal pictures that has to be
easy to navigate easy to administer and where I can mix video with pictures
obviously nice looking and that for me to learn so that was one of my first project
I ended up learning everything that I wanted and yeah I mean he was I
completed my personal photo album. I called it like that, I called it Personal Photo
Album and now I mean that was one of my projects. I can tell you another one,
once I wanted to learn about a programming language called Perl, and so my
project was too collect data you know from public available data, I was collecting
finance information so I can you know use it to analyze stocks for the stock
market so I was collecting the data and running some algorithms and giving some
projects and or something but that was with the objective of learning Perl. And
yeah I mean once you define a project, “okay I’m going to do it,” it really requires
a lot to you know you need to really start mastering the language to accomplish
something so it’s better if that program or that thing you’re trying to learn
accomplishes something because otherwise it might you know get lost in between
so that’s why that’s a good way to learn. Put complex projects and complete them.
Even if it’s just for fun I mean doesn’t need to go anywhere that project it’s just for
fun. But that gives you always learning and it’s a good thing.
D: And so that project… what did you name it?
P: That one I called Stock Analyzer.
D: I see a pattern. You get the function, and that’s the name now. I think I might
just be overthinking all this.
P: No just like I say is not commercial I didn’t launch a new—it’s just for me. It’s
just a fun project, I call it the Stock Analyzer. You know my Stock Analzyer helped
me learn Perl you know and also keeping personal finances. The other one I
organize pictures. I think I still have it around. But yeah, just prioritize yourself to
to learn technologies and there’s another one I think of but I don’t know if you
want to cover a third one.
D: By all means!
P: Okay, so there is another one that I always want to do with all these
virtualization technologies. I wanted to have one computer to have many
computers in the house instead of having each one their own computers just one
computer that has all of them. So that forced me to learn virtualization, GPU pass-
through, and you know I completed that project. It has an internal NAS so I learn
about NAS technologies and different protocols and yeah, all that came together
and currently even my my PCs runs like that.
D: I’ve never dealt with visualization programmatically. I’ll actually look into that
at some point!
P: Okay sure definitely recommend it.
D: Thank you for the inspiration.
P: Sure, absolutely.
D: And that is all I have to ask.
P: Good luck, you’re in the right path of things, you like it, you’re passionate
about it, so definitely work hard and you will do it.
D: Well thank you so much! It was a pleasure and I actually learned quite a bit
from this. So, thank you, and that will be the end of this recording.
